[Music]
thank you
welcome to the secret to secret podcast
my name is Simeon and it's my honor to
introduce to you today our first ever
guest on the podcast Dr Christopher M
bish
is professor emeritus at the department
of philosophy and religious studies at
Youngstown State University where he
taught for 33 years
his work explores the philosophical
complications of non-ordinary states of
Consciousness particularly psychedelic
States
he has authored four books his latest
one being LSD and the mind of the
universe or as Chris prefers to call it
diamonds from heaven
in diamonds from heaven
Chris combines his expert knowledge of
the world's wisdom Traditions with the
insights he personally gained from 20
years of intense high-dose psychedelic
work undertaking in secrecy
and um
the cosmic plan that revealed itself to
Chris is both astonishing and beautiful
and Carries great implications about the
way we should understand our individual
and our Collective existence
Chris and I split our conversation
neatly into two parts
so in the first half of the podcast you
can get some more details on the general
areas that Chris's work focuses on and
the general chronology of his work but
if you're familiar with Chris's work
feel free to skip ahead halfway where we
delve into issues that Chris hasn't
spoken about in length before such as
the nature of suffering and Evil and
also how reincarnation and the non-self
can both be true at the same time
one final note please bear with me as I
get this podcast up and running I know
that video quality and audio quality on
my end are pretty bad but
um I promise better quality in the
future and fortunately Chris does most
of the talking here so it shouldn't be
too much of a issue
I hope the beautiful conversation Chris
and I had brings you Joy and wisdom same
as it brought me
and I hope you enjoy
thank you for watching
good so uh so to begin would you like to
kind of give a general overview of your
work that kind of you talked about in
the book what the book is about and what
your experiences really were
yeah well
it all began right after I finished
graduate school in 1978 I had started I
started my career as a professor of
religious studies at Youngstown State
University in Ohio
and I read Stan Groff's first book
Realms of the human unconscious and I
knew immediately that this was
critically important work to my
discipline which was philosophy of
religion and Stan outlined a methodology
that allowed us to enter systematically
and carefully and unsafely into these
deep States Of Consciousness in which we
could not only heal but explore the
deepest levels of our mind and entering
into those levels dropping into deeper
levels of consciousness that went beyond
individual mind
so that excited me very much as a young
philosopher I thought this was great
this is a whole new philosophical method
so I began to do this work
and to do it of course since it was
illegal at the time I had to make a
choice and I don't like doing things
illegal but I made a choice to divide
myself in half and in my daytime job for
the next 33 years I was a professor of
religious studies at Youngstown State
University teaching courses and doing
the things that people do and then my
nighttime job I began the systematic
journey into deep non-ordinary States Of
Consciousness using LSD and I used LSD
because that was the substance that Stan
had worked with in his early years
that's what his research was based on
primarily and I trusted what I saw in
his work
uh so I used that
and after my sessions my work was always
following the protocols that he laid out
in his early book LSD psychotherapy
they were always protected from the
world they were always private I worked
with a sitter
I was always lying down with carefully
choreographed music
pacing the stages of opening and closing
in the sessions
and I made a very careful and sustained
effort to record each session faithfully
and completely after the session was
over
so I began this work I did it intensely
for four years
and then for reasons that I describe in
the book I stopped the work for six
years
and then I resumed it for another 10
years of work I started in 1979 and I
finished it in 1999. I did 73 high dose
sessions
over this 20-year period I started with
three medium dose sessions and then went
into all the rest of my sessions were
high dose sessions
which I worked at 500 to 600 micrograms
which is
a protocol that I don't recommend I
don't recommend such a a long sustained
hammering of the boundaries of
Consciousness exploding so relentlessly
into these this work I would work much
differently if I did it again today I
would work more slowly I would alternate
high doses with low doses
and I would work I would balance LSD
with more body grounded or psychedelics
such as psilocybin in ayahuasca
but what happened on the journey
basically is that I went through
not just one death not just ego death
but the universe took me in gradually
through multiple layers of reality
deeper and deeper through deeper levels
of consciousness and I found that
entering deeper levels of consciousness
and therefore and through them accessing
deeper levels of reality required going
through a series of deaths
dying at one level of Consciousness to
enter a deeper level of Consciousness
and then mastering or learning the ins
and outs of that level and then going
through yet another death to enter in a
yet a still deeper level of
consciousness
so when I got to the end of the journey
and was looking at all of the years of
work
I basically asked myself how many
fundamental levels of reality did I
experience or how many cycles of death
and rebirth
and I I came up with five
there was a level that took place at the
level of collective excuse me personal
mind ego death then there was a level
that took place at the level of
collective mind the collective mind of
our species
then there was a level that took place
at
archetypal mind
and then the level of causal reality the
level of Oneness
and then in the five last years of my
work uh the level of diamond Luminosity
what I call Diamond luminosity uh what
Buddhism calls the absolute of the
absolute the clear light of absolute
reality
so after I finished my sessions
uh spirit said to me in my meditation
20 years in 20 years out
and I took that at the time to mean that
it would take me 20 years to fully
assimilate and integrate 20 years of my
sessions
as it turned out
LST in the mind of the universe or as I
prefer to call it diamonds from heaven
was published exactly 20 years after I
finished my sessions so there was 20
years of exploration
followed by 20 years of digesting
reflecting integrating and finally
telling the story of this journey
and I share it in the hope that it will
be useful to other people both people
who are journeyers but also people who
are not journeyers who are involved in
spiritual practices other than
psychedelics because of the I hope the
cosmology that emerges in the story and
the understanding of some of the
cosmological processes that we're all
engaged in
will be useful to people
yes well uh yeah your work is definitely
fascinating and um well one thing I
think that is very important to address
whenever somebody is talking about
psychedelic States and insights that
arise from them I think the the go-to
argument of the skeptic is these are
states that appear while the mind is
under the influence of a substance
therefore why should the any insights
game be legitimate but even to take this
argument further when you are exploring
um but when you're having your
experiences under the the influence of
these substances how do you know what
you are studying how do you know what
you're seeing is this the cosmos is this
your personal psyche what is it that you
are experiencing
yeah
really an important question isn't it
can we trust what emerges in our
awareness in psychedelic states of
awareness
well I took my starting point from
Stan's observations and many other
psychedelic therapists in the early
years and that is an understanding that
psychedelics don't give you an
experience what they simply do is
amplify your own Consciousness they are
an amplifier and a catalyst of your own
mind
and if you use these hours of Amplified
awareness carefully if you focus them
and internalize them and keep your
vision focused on the stream of
awareness that's arising within you
you begin a process of purification and
a process of
confrontation with the different blocks
and pains and things we'd rather not
look at in our daily life your system
just spontaneously moves to eliminate
those challenges which are lodged in our
history sometimes our history from
Justice lifetime sometimes our history
from former lifetimes
in the early stages
we know that
we can judge the legitimacy of what's a
what we are experiencing because these
are activating memories from our
lifetime we can verify those memories we
can explore them they have the texture
of memory
and when we confront the pains that
arise there
is a liberating experience there is a
healing experience which has
demonstrable impacts on our daily life
after a session has ended so there's a
tremendous sense of
verification of the truth of what one is
encountering and that tends to give
confidence that when one moves Beyond
The Familiar when one moves beyond the
domain of one's immediate life
that there is a truth also in these
experiences even though they're coming
from a more foreign level of
Consciousness this process repeats
itself so one enters into a reality
which is
completely foreign unknown strange
and at first maybe what stands out is
its strangeness
but the more frequently you go back into
that reality the more you become
familiar with its landscape
in my experience is that if you engage
these hours carefully and if you record
them and re and work hard to retain them
listen to what it's teaching you
the universe enters into a dialogue with
you it's like now it knows you're paying
attention and so it's speaking to you
and it takes you through an educational
process it takes you through a series of
of lessons about how reality works here
uh what's going on at this level of
reality
and in the early stages there are
certain qualities that relate to your
personal life maybe uh you experience
your personal life in a larger
in a larger spiritual trajectory you may
have insights into former lives you may
have insights into your deeper former
life history that clarifies and heals
relationships in your present life and
because these have such a dramatic
impact
on our present life once again their
legitimacy is
confirmed in your own life experience
and as one goes deeper into Collective
mind into archetypal reality into deeper
into spiritual reality in this case I
had I was fortunate in that I had a PhD
in philosophy of religion I had a lot of
opportunity to study some of the great
spiritual traditions of the world so I
was familiar with some of the ins and
outs of spiritual practice as cells have
been developed in different countries I
had an understanding of their maps of
what lies in the spiritual world
and so I had a reference point to
compare my experiences in psychedelic
states with the experiences that other
spiritual Seekers were having in their
Traditions using meditation methods
yogic methods or psychedelic methods to
explore reality from across the world
now I've always taken a Global
Perspective and I teach I taught intro
to world religions for years I taught
courses on comparative mysticism I've
always found that the deepest patterns
that emerge or for me the most
interesting patterns are the patterns
that emerge not simply in one culture in
one spiritual tradition but in multiple
Traditions looked at simultaneously and
when you can hold the world spiritual
traditions in your Consciousness all at
the same time then you begin to see
patterns that connect the different
lineages into larger holes and I found
that my psychedelic experiences fit
comfortably within that larger landscape
and I I have to qualify because it fit
comfortably and yet as I went deeper it
also pushed the boundaries of those
experiences and took me deeper
but I guess in addition to this sort of
personal verification and then
Collective Global spiritual
correspondence which is a kind of
verification
there is an experiential quality to
these experiences
uh you pay a great price to enter into
these states you must go through
multiple multiple cycles of purification
detoxification confrontation with your
own limitations layer after layer in
order to enter
into clear states of perception clear
states of awareness
these states of awareness have equality
where
it's just transparently clear that you
are experiencing something real
something genuine it doesn't mean
necessarily that you're seeing all that
exists or everything that's there or
that's not that there can't be
limitations or distortions in your
experience but you know you are
confronting something which is just as
real
is what you confront in time space
reality
so in this dialogue in this dance
my conviction grew that I was on a
journey
a journey that had philosophical value a
journey that was producing genuine
insights into how our universe works the
structure of the universe doesn't mean
that everything I saw is necessarily
perfectly correct but there is a
fundamental conviction that these are
real that these are valuable
and they're shared by other persons if I
were only my experiences then maybe they
would just be a solipsistic fantasy but
by comparing your experiences to the
experiences of other psychedelic
explorers and in this respect Stan
Groff's compendium of so many hundreds
and thousands of psychedelic journeyers
and their experiences gave me confidence
that what I was experiencing was not
simply a personal illusion or a personal
fantasy but was flowing in accord with
what other psychedelic journeyers had
experienced and then by comparing them
to the cosmologies of meditation
traditions it gave me confidence that
psychedelics were not
psychedelics were just a key that were
giving us access to states of awareness
which are Universal and you can get
access to these states using other
methods as well
I see so and you began your work with
the motivation to explore the universe
as a philosopher is that correct
yeah that was my intention I'm not a
therapist I wasn't I mean I've received
much healing in this work and always
grateful for it but that was not my
primary intention I was trained as a
philosopher of religion I wanted to
explore the universe as deeply as I
could and understand not only my nature
but understand the larger landscape of
the universe
and and you're saying that despite the
fact so the fact that your experiences
fit in kind of the larger body of
religious and philosophical traditions
we have as a species gave you confidence
that what you're experiencing is genuine
but at the same time you also push the
boundary in terms of seeing things that
you had not encountered before and
elsewhere so uh keeping this in mind do
you believe that psychedelics
um offer the promise of new insights
that we can gain philosophically and
spiritually that we have not uncovered
before
how GC psychedelics is fitting in to the
Future development of philosophy and
spirituality of our species yeah
well this this is an exciting time and
exciting territory
uh I became convinced early on that
psychedelics represented a true before
and after
development in philosophical reflection
because in philosophical reflection in
one way or another we are always
reflecting upon the breadth of Human
Experience not only our own experience
but other people's experiences
and we here have an opportunity to
temporarily deepen our Consciousness
deepen our awareness and push the
boundaries of awareness
and I think this opens up not only
individual selective insights into the
nature of Consciousness but it also
opens up the possibility of an entire
new method of exploration which was
first articulated I think by William
jakewell in modern times it there are
ancient prototypes of this work in the
ellessinian mystery schools and and the
Ayahuasca churches of Brazil but in
Western philosophy probably first
articulated by William James and that is
a systematic rhythm of expanding
consciousness
experiencing what you can experience
coming back recording it
evaluating it comparing it to other
bodies of knowledge comparing it to
other people's experiences
and then expanding again going out again
coming back same process writing it down
this rhythm of expansion and then
evaluation expansion and evaluation I
think opens up the possibility it allows
us to explore dimensions of
Consciousness that are for the most part
for most people unless they have our
lifelong spiritual practitioners of some
of the meditative arts for most people
these dimensions of consciousness
are invisible they just lie outside the
purview of their awareness
but by systematically entering into
these temporary States we can explore
them we can taste them we can sample
them and we can gather insights about
how the universe is working because we
find that
all the awareness all the intelligence
all the compassion which is inside us is
not something which has been assembled
my mechanical chances by mechanical
processes which are driven by random
variation as of the modern mind thinks
but we find that our mind opens into an
infinite mind something which is
ultimately an infinite mind it opens up
into the species mind the collective
unconscious of our species into deeper
and deeper levels beyond the species and
ultimately into the mind which is the
generative mind of the universe itself
at least that's my experience
now philosophically we've been talking
about that mine for years even in
denying its existence if you choose the
atheistic alternative but we've been
wanting to know about we've been asking
questions about our larger place and the
cosmos whether there is meaning in our
lives whether there is intention in The
evolutionary project
what the hell is going on why does life
hurt so much why is there so much
suffering these are core philosophical
questions that in the modern mind many
philosophers have just abandoned and
just said they're unanswerable we can't
know so we're going to change the topic
of discussion but still as long as we
live we want to know the answer to these
questions psychedelics I think give us
an opportunity to systematically and
rigorously engage these questions and
that's a turning point because
ideally for example I think we would
want to take a hundred people say the
best educated people most creative
people with phds and multiple
disciplines and then go through the same
systematic regimen of disclosure
encounter and then compare the notes of
all these people and see what is the
collective patterns that they're what is
the common ground that they see and
recognize this tokens I think this is
what's beginning to happen this is what
we're doing this is what we will be
doing for hundreds of years and this is
a turning point philosophy this really
marks a difference between old
philosophy which was done on the basis
of just sensory Consciousness and a new
philosophy which is done on the basis of
this new technology this new technology
of encounter
mm-hmm
that's that's really
momentous changes that seem to be coming
within the Psychedelic Renaissance which
seems to be happening at the moment
um but for for our viewers that in your
book you have a really nice section
where you um describe a day in the life
of a few doing your psychedelic session
um for those of our listeners and
viewers that are not aware of it would
you go through it and tell us what your
protocols really were and how a typical
session they would go well there's a
chapter in the book
um basically a session day because some
of the readers early readers of the
manuscript asked me to do just this to
kind of take him into a typical day so
here's a typical day
all my sessions took place in my house
or in my wife's
um therapeutic office
they always began in the early morning I
was always I would begin with meditation
or yoga or some type of centering
practice to get myself centered
and the more I worked with these states
the more important I paid to more parts
I've understood
was the preparation not only the
preparation of sentence setting which is
well appreciated today but a lot of
attention to my emotional state and my
physical state a lot of practices uh
purifying my body making sure that my
literally my physical bone structure was
aligned because when you enter into
these states if you are not really
um
balanced open pores in in good condition
you can get into all into various
complications and energy gets jammed up
in your body but the dates they would
start early morning I would
um
go through my practice and then my
sitter for all the 20 years of my work
was my first wife Carol who was a
clinical psychologist
and uh basically after these early
preparations I would take the
Psychedelic and then I would turn over
responsibility to my condition to urge
and my protection she would take care of
me she would make sure I was safe she
would make sure that I would stay
focused inwardly that I would not allow
myself to get distracted or act out in
any dangerous way
I for the most part because I was
working with very high doses of LSD
there was no verbal interaction I was
listening to music she was the curator
of the music responsible for intuiting
when to shift from one stage to another
there are certain stages in a
psychedelic session
I would basically do the work as long as
it lasted which is usually six to eight
hours
she was with me the whole time making
sure I was safe until I was back and
consolidating
uh and then I would spend that evening
uh reflecting on the sessions thinking
about it trying to put together the
first
map of what had happened in the sessions
and often I didn't sleep much the day
after a session
uh but the next day it was always a
priority to make a written account of
the session
and when you're entering really foreign
territory making an accurate written
record can be challenging now some
people who have artistic abilities can
draw them or paint them Alex Gray's work
such wonderful work other psychedelic
artists I don't have those skills so for
me it was making a written record
and in order to
learn how to capture experiences that
are so Elusive and so far beyond our
ordinary way of knowing I developed a
technique
I called it standing at the edge of the
well the day after a session you're
still porous around the edges but your
verbal and cognitive functions have
returned so what I would do is I would
play the music that was used in this
session in exactly the same order that
it had been played in the session
and I would get back into the mood or
the psychological space of the that I
was in when this music was being played
and from that condition one foot in the
session one foot out I would write up
that portion of the experience and when
I was done with that I'd shift to the
next piece of music and play it over and
over until I had captured as best as I
could what had been happening during
that music and when I was done I had my
draft of the session once I had that
draft I locked it I didn't change it I
learned that by trying sometimes trying
to improve the text or make it a little
more polished that you lose something
that is contained in the original raw
language so once I had that text I
locked it uh
yeah and then I would spend weeks months
sometimes uh basically studying the
sessions trying to understand it put it
in the context of previous sessions on
average I was doing about five sessions
a year
that's kind of a statistically that's
what it worked out so I had plenty of
time in between my sessions to digest
and assimilate them and I was also doing
spiritual practice during this time I
was always meditating so the day after a
session always began with meditation
which is a nice spacious place to be
able to open up and just let the energy
that had been running in you during a
session flow uh in you in your
meditative space
so that's basically what a session
looked like I would not eat anything but
for breakfast always an empty stomach
because I would throw up often because
you know people don't think you throw up
on LSD but you do you know this is it's
one of the symptoms of Shifting states
of energy it's your body has some
challenge adjusting to these more
intense States
and I would eat something light at the
very end of the day
there's so many things I'm curious about
your particular approach but one thing
in particular for me is music I want to
ask you about the way you use music
because music and psychedelics have
always had a very special relationship I
think and there have been different
approaches so for example Terence
mechanics famous for saying five Drive
grams in silent darkness that was his
recommendation and he he once famously
joked that if you come out of a
psychedelic session saying Buck was a
genius well you know everybody knows
that so
his approach rather was to kind of let
the experience take you where it takes
you but you were as I read in your book
were very particular in the your choice
of music and it changed as you
progressed in your in your work
there was also one very funny moment in
which your your sitter put on the the
wrong piece of music but this this
actually helped you get out of a very
kind of difficult situation so yes
what's your approach with music
well music does influence our experience
and and I do value
um working without music I mean I I've
continued to work with psychedelics
after stopping my high-dose LSD work
but and during this post LSD work I
often will just enter into meditative
space with psilocybin or ayahuasca
and in the Psychedelic work itself
in the late years in the late sessions I
would often end the music
in the second half of the session and
just move into meditative space
but basically I followed the protocol
that was kind of laid out in the early
psychedelic research in the
understanding here is not that music
gives you experiences but that music can
support the underlying immersion of your
unconscious into your awareness so it
just kind of provides a
a background that makes it easier for
you to detach from the habits of your
mind and to go with the flow as it were
into what emerges is emerging so I I
think it of it as supporting and
reinforcing what happens when you do go
simply into the dark without any music
at all and we know that there are stages
of the LSD experience there's a it takes
so many minutes for it to begin to
become active it builds in potency
again you have to look carefully at the
Psychedelic you're using the the curve
of activation on it the depth of
activation
um it's different if you're working with
low doses of LSD than if you're working
with high doses of LSD
working as I did with high dose levels
there was a tremendous acceleration of
Consciousness a tremendous speed with
which your body and your mind is
adjusting to the extraordinary increase
of energy and and awareness as you begin
to break through the bounds of personal
Consciousness and so they're Helen
Bonnie's early work on the stages of
psychedelic of a psychedelic session and
the type of music that supports that
session
so I followed those early guidelines
which have been further expanded in the
holotropic breathwork network which has
a good large library of musical
recommendations
I found I I came across early on in
about 12 by about the
fifth or sixth or seventh session I Came
Upon some indigenous chanting types of
indigenous chanting and I found that
that music had a much more powerful
impact on my on my experiences than
listening to classical music even New
pieces of classical music and and I did
listen to Lots but they still kept
within conventional they kind of kept
within a more conventional framework and
I found that indigenous music that was
foreign that was unknown that I didn't
understand the words of and they had a a
more of a cathartic opening effect in my
Consciousness so I found it very useful
and I began to collect all manner of
indigenous music and different cultures
from around the world and I Incorporated
them into my sessions and then when you
are at Peak when you've gone through
you've ever gone through the
purification or the death process and
you've transitioned into
deeper uh ecstatic reality into
Visionary States
uh you want music which is more
expansive which is kind of gives your
mind room to work so to speak just very
very expansive
and then as you begin the long slow
descent uh LSD has a long tail so that's
a long slow process which is really one
of the nice advantages of LLC it gives
you time inside the session
to integrate reflect upon to compose
yourself with respect to the experiences
that you've just had so you want long
gentle gentle expansive uh music in all
of the work until the very end uh you
don't want any words in English or any
words in your native language words
which you can understand because you
don't want them to script your
experience best to uh
well I found that
I would only really could use Music
three times before I had to let it go
for the most part because by the time
you've used music several times it tends
to get saturated with the experiences
that you had with that music so when you
listen to the music it tends to take you
back into where you were before not
where you are now so I would really
limit myself to using music only a few
times and then I had to find new music
when you're in the downward slope when
you're coming back into your more
familiar life then that applies less I
am more comfortable using
more familiar music in the spacious
return
okay
I see
um also well another thing about your
sessions also I think which a person who
is not familiar with your work and who
is not familiar with the Psychedelic
work at all would think okay here is
this person he's having this Visionary
experiences it's all very nice and very
interesting and he's writing about them
so it must be very exciting very
pleasant work but I think anybody a
little bit familiar with the Psychedelic
experience would know that these are
especially hide those experiences are
very uh difficult experiences to go
through so some especially I know that
your initial sessions you write about
them they were very expensive very
exciting but as time went on uh they
became more and more difficult and
difficult times started appearing more
often and they were harder to go through
so at some point I'm sure it was
difficult for you to uh to kind of go
through it again knowing what's probably
waiting for you that it's going to be a
day of really difficult experiences so
um so in the light of this how did you
work with daily spiritual practice to
help you prepare for this and also not
only for this but also to kind of
incorporate
um your insights into your daily life
because as you've said previously the
Psychedelic experiences we cannot hold
on to them so we need to find ways to
integrate them
yeah
well
let me try to hold on to two parts to
your question first of all
um the method of working with high dose
LSD and then issues of the challenges
that come up and the three things the
challenges that come up in high dose
work and third integrating those
experiences into daily life so if I get
lost in my answer you bring me back to
those three okay
uh Stan's early work differentiated very
clearly between low-dose psycholytic
therapy
and high-dose psychedelic therapy
low-dose psycholytic therapy is kind of
much more similar to what is being done
today the goal here is to amplify
Consciousness but not but do it in a way
where the unconscious unfolds itself
gradually layer by layer taking us
systematically kind of
more less traumatically into the inner
confrontation that heals
their psychedelic work was very
different and what stands out in my mind
is their work at the Spring Grove
Hospital in Maryland
where they were basically working with a
different population they were working
with terminally ill cancer patients so
they were working with people who were
going to die
and they were trying to trigger an
encounter with Cosmic reality they were
trying to trigger essentially an nde a
near-death experience that would give
them a foretaste of where they were
going when they died
uh and they this protocol limited
high-dose sessions to three sessions no
more than three sessions
so
this is a very different protocol it
wasn't really trying to heal all the
layers of personal issues it was trying
to blow through the personal unconscious
and go into
Cosmic reality just to get a taste to
get a sample
so I thought well if you could do that
three times
you can do it more than three times and
just just go for it let's just go for it
and see how deeply we can go
and in doing that I found it took me
about two years of work about 10
sessions
to basically go through what Stan calls
the perinatal level of Consciousness
where I lived my birth and
relive various very strong physical
emotional confrontations
existential crises questioning the
meaning of existence the meaningfulness
the futility of Life all the things one
goes through and those initial and early
experiences
and then I went through kind of a
classic ego death experience where my my
individual identity was shattered it was
turned inside out I was forced to become
the exact opposite of everything I knew
myself to be and in that process
Chris bash's life Chris basia's
historical existence ceased to be the
container of my Consciousness I just
moved into a more expansive awareness
beyond
the historicity of crispacia's life
as I went deeper
I began to experience a very very
different order of challenges that were
not personal I began to be
systematically taken into
vast territories of pain and suffering
violence and wars and just brutal uh
is like Dante's Inferno except many
times worse
uh and
this was much harder than experiencing
my the doubts of metaphysical anxiety or
the you know my personal ego death this
was something different
um but here's the thing I would spend
hours in this condition and it was
difficult and going back into it to the
next session I had to really steal
myself to prepare myself to enter into
this domain once I knew that it was
coming
but I would spend a couple of hours or a
few hours in this process and then it
would reach a crescendo and it would
spin me out into the Visionary state it
would spin me out into the ecstatic
Visionary state
and when that happens
the pain of the very intense pain of the
ocean of suffering was balanced and
proportioned to the great ecstatic joy
that followed in the ecstatic portion of
those sessions
so when you understand this cycle when
you understand the pattern that there
will be this very intense period of pain
in some form or another
but this is going to be followed by an
even deeper immersion into ecstatic
Visionary experience
you you
uh it's not just that the sessions
become pain-filled there is a new layer
of pain but there's also a new layer of
insight and ecstasy and joy and that's
what gives you the strength to return
and keep coming back to these states and
that tremendous sense of uh
ecstatic Visionary encounter
cosmological inquiry and so as I went at
the the ocean of suffering lasted two
more years and I went through that level
and then I went through yet another
death rebirth process and then came into
another deeper level of Consciousness
archetypal reality and moving deep into
the collective psyche and archetypal
psyche and then going through yet
another death and rebirth went into the
Ecstasy of
Oneness the Ecstasy of calls or reality
for an entire year just experience after
experience of different levels of uh
[Music]
of Oneness parameters of Oneness so
the challenge does increase
but the payoff also increases as you go
deeper so
it's um I've always considered that
trade-off a good exchange I've always
been a volunteer in this process nothing
was done to me I always was willing to
go there
and the rewards that I was given for the
engagement
uh always made it worthwhile
I wouldn't trade these 73 days for
anything any of the Treasures of the
world
that's beautiful
um
about the Psychedelic work one thing
that I've noticed is that they
psychedelic work parallels in a certain
way
just what people with code normal uh
spiritual daily practice so let's say if
somebody reads your book but entirely
forgets the fact that you were entering
into psychedelic States they could read
it as a report of a person going through
intense daily meditation practice let's
say because I think these cycles of
purification and then expanses insight
and and Bliss appear in the normal space
of Consciousness so in in a merge in a
much kind of smaller scale but I think
there's essentially a mirroring almost
fractal like uh parallels between
psychedelic States and real life yes
and
kind of why I'm really interested into
how you've used uh daily spiritual
practice is because I um essentially
think that they shouldn't re they should
be discontinuity between daily practice
and psychedelics is very important I
think because uh ramdas used to say that
you know going on an LSD trip is like
being with Buddha or Jesus in the room
for two hours but then you have to leave
and then the artist is kind of staying
in that room for as long as you can
without any assessment so what what are
your views on that
yeah well I completely agree with you
that there's nothing unique uh about
psychedelic experiences because they are
amplifiers of Consciousness so it's
Consciousness that does the work in the
end
uh it's not psychedelics that do any
unique work it's Consciousness I've had
many readers write me and say you know
I've never taken a psychedelic in my
life but I completely relate to what
you're describing it mirrors my own
experience in terms of these
breakthroughs and levels or this
particular part of the experience so I
know we know that there is a profound
overlap and continuity between our work
in ordinary spiritual let's say
non-psychedelic spiritual practice and
psychedelic spiritual practice and it's
more than just that I mean basically in
order to understand what happens in
psychedelic sessions we have to have an
understanding of what's happening in
life what how life works now for me
reincarnation is just a fact of
existence you know that's my first book
was on reincarnation and I consider the
empirical evidence
supporting a reincarnational worldview
is just overwhelming at this point it
doesn't mean that we understand how it
all works all the details of it but that
there is a continuity arcing through
multiple lifetimes in a larger
developmental evolutionary process is
really important to understand so in
order to understand this rhythm of where
we are
we die and we our Consciousness gets
large into the soul territory
we incarnate and we get small and
focused and we die and we get large and
we incarnate we get small in focus and
we keep going back back and forth and
it's like every time we incarnate we
choose a certain set of issues we choose
a certain set of of challenges that we
face and confront and as we face and
confront those things our life develops
it you know sometimes we don't do so
well we flunk the course other times we
do very well we're passed and moved on
and this Rhythm uh shows itself inside
every life and across multiple lives
when we are when we go through if we
look at long strings of our of lives
that's in past life therapy or that type
of work
and in this sense I think what LSD what
any spiritual practice does and
psychedelic spiritual practice does is
that it accelerates this process we're
reincarnation moves very slowly and
grinds very finely but if you want to
speed up the process you can turn
awareness back onto itself and look at
where awareness is coming from examine
and engage their challenges that you are
facing in the outer World in their core
nuclear form when they exist as thought
forms within your Consciousness if you
don't do that they will eventually these
thought forms will manifest as your
outer physical reality but if and and
you'll learn from them but if you speed
up that want to speed up the process you
can look at them in their nuclear form
and engage them before they manifest in
the physical world
this happens in spiritual practice in
meditative practice and it also happens
in psychedelic practice
so I completely agree with you the more
I've worked with psychedelics the more
I'm convinced that if you want to open
yourself up to these temporary States Of
Consciousness it's very important to be
practicing have a daily spiritual
practice in fact the deeper the State of
Consciousness you enter temporarily the
stronger should be your daily practice
because when you open to these vast
fields of energy these vast territories
of Consciousness
it places tremendous
challenges it make it tremendous strains
in a way not only on your mind but on
your body on your subtle Energy System
and it's really important I think to
bring those experiences into a daily
spiritual practice so that your the
conditions you move into in your
spiritual practice in your daily
practice
give you the greater capacity to absorb
and integrate and to navigate not only
the insights but the the experiences
that immerse in your psychedelic States
in my psychedelic States I was given
many practices I was given not just
teachings and experiences but I was
basically told do this do that you know
I was given practices and I would take
those practices into my daily spiritual
practice
in the last five years of my work and
there's a I discussed this in the
diamond Luminosity chapter
I
entered into
um vadriana Buddhism I had always been a
meditator but I began a more formal
relationship with vodriana teachers and
I began to practice within this Buddhist
Tibetan Buddhist tradition
and I found this was very helpful for
where I was working at the time because
I was working at that time in very very
pure and very intense states of
awareness Diamond luminosity
and I was finding that it wasn't getting
increasingly difficult for this for my
subtle Energy System to sustain the
encounter with the enormous flows of
pure energy in this diamond
consciousness
and when I began to do these ancient
practices when I began to do should in
the various deity practices of Adriana I
found that my physical and psychological
and subtle energy systems were able to
breathe more freely it was like my
vadriana practice gave me a space to
enter that was midway between my
physical Consciousness and my
psychedelic Consciousness and by
entering those States I was able to
breathe and flow
the energy that came into my psychedelic
sessions I could I could
channel that energy I could it just kind
of moved more freely it gave me a way of
dialoguing with the universe that
allowed my body and my mind to sort of
breathe more comfortably this was very
helpful at the time
so I completely agree with you I mean
the most important thing I think to
remember about psychedelics in terms of
spiritual practices you can't take a
psychedelic when you die
when you die you go into the universe
you're all on your own the mind you take
is the mind you got
so knowing that
everything you do in your psychedelic
work should be preparing yourself for
that final encounter when you let go of
the body and you enter into that world
you can't take psychedelics when you're
dead
now I think psychedelics can give us can
teach us a lot about where we're going
it can prepare the soul for where it's
going so that territory which may strike
us as kind of strange and intimidating
for an ordinary person when they die we
can encounter it as you know just a
familiar route that we've traveled
multiple times before in our psychedelic
sessions so I I don't I understand the
tension
for some teachers of classical
meditation
and their criticism of psychedelics as
kind of
a false spirituality or
um
distracting
experiences I understand that but for me
I've never found it to be an
incompatible
approach to spiritual a deepening
spiritual experience it's not the same
it does open up different types of
experiences but if you understand
spiritual practice if you understand how
spirituality what spirituality is
I think that's spiritual that
psychedelic work can reinforce and
accelerate
our daily spiritual practice in ways
that are really very beneficial
yes I I agree with that and also myself
I'm very interested in how one can
achieve synergies between between the
two
um now in in this last answer that you
gave you already touched upon some of
the kind of uh deeper
territories of your work so I'm
wondering whether you'd like to move
into this and discuss the the the the
the cosmic blueprint that was revealed
to you uh during your work
um
one one of the one of the things that
you talk about is reincarnation and I
find this very interesting uh reading
you reading your book uh gave me kind of
almost a permission to be interested
intellectually interested in in
reincarnation and not to be shy about it
and you
your work has really made me consider
incarnation in a serious way for the
first time and kind of discuss it with
other people
um so you mentioned a number of books a
number of authors and in fact it's kind
of a large literature that exists that
has documented cases that are suggested
for reincarnation
um so I was curious
what has convinced you of reincarnation
in your reading and in your personal
experience
yeah
well
when I began my teaching at Youngstown
State I told you that Stan Groff was a
major turning point in my life but there
was another author who was also a major
turning point and this is Dr Ian
Stevenson at the University of Virginia
and uh he's passed on now but the work
continues at Virginia and he had spent a
lifetime he and his team
studying children from around the world
different cultures different religious
backgrounds or non-religious backgrounds
children who as soon as they begin to be
able to talk when they're two years old
they begin to speak very
matter-of-factly about their other life
that they remember having lived they
describe people in places and events
they often have a very powerful
emotional attachment to that previous
life they will run away from home
sometimes just to return to the family
that they knew in their previous life so
Stevenson has studied thousands of cases
like this and he's published hundreds of
cases most of the cases he studied do
not meet the highest levels of rigor
required for verification and
publication but an amazing number of
courses do allow themselves to be
verified so when I read his book 20
cases suggestive of reincarnation it
just it absolutely showed me something
that I had never encountered in graduate
school never in any in my studies that
reincarnation is a simple fact of life
these children who know things that they
shouldn't know that we can reasonably
exclude other possibilities that they
could have come through this knowledge
through normal or physical channels
their parents talking or their neighbors
talking or something they saw on
television or in a newspaper that we can
reasonably eliminate those possibilities
and we have to confront the fact that
these children know things that other
people that about other people's lives
and have an emotional attachment and
identification with what with that
knowledge
that seems clearly to indicate that
there is continuity between the life
experience of that previous life and
their present life
and at the end of his career
Stevenson publishes Monument Opus in
which he demonstrated
not only that our memories continuous
but in some cases even our bodies bear
the marks of events that took place in
our previous lifetime that children he
he studied 187 cases of children who had
birthmarks are pigmentation are seeming
scars on their body that reflected the
death circumstances of previous life so
someone who was stabbed in a previous
life and they have a memory of that life
had a birthmark where they were stabbed
in a way that replicated that are
someone who was hung had scars on their
neck that seemed to correlate it's an
absolutely fascinating study and from
there once I was convinced by
Stevenson's research that reincarnation
was simply part of life
I went on to study the work of multiple
past life therapists who were working
with their clients to heal the wounds of
their present life
most of the time when you work in
therapy the wounds of your present life
go back to some trauma or some
disruption some unhappiness from our
present life earlier in our life but he
past life therapists consistently find
that there's a certain percentage of
pains which are not healed when you go
back to your farm to your present life
but when you allow your mind to open
into your deeper history
then
all of a sudden you are reliving a
deeper story you are remembering things
that happened when you were a different
person than you are now
but you remember them with the same
sense of identification and self-sense
that you have for your present life
and when people do this when they go
back and relive the pains and the trauma
or the conflicts that were present in
their previous life it has a healing
effect on their present life and after
reading hundreds of cases like this it
just became more and more obvious to me
that reincarnation is part of the larger
rhythm of our life it doesn't mean I
agreed with all the interpretations of
reincarnation in fact that's one of the
things that came up in my sessions was
an expansion of the model of what's
taking place in reincarnation
but the fact of reincarnation the fact
that one life
rolls into another life rolls into
another life with time in between I mean
Michael Newton's work
um a past life therapist life between
life his book's journey of the Soul uh
journeys of the soul and Destiny of
souls has done fascinating work he was
doing conventional kind of past life
regression therapy and he he made a
mistake one day in one of his with one
of his clients he gave an ambiguous
instruction and suddenly he realized
that his patients were described his
patient was describing what happened to
them after they died in the former life
they had been reliving so he discovered
that people had the capacity not only to
remember their former lives but to
remember what they were doing in between
their incarnate lives and so he after he
had regressed just hundreds of people
back into this in between State he began
to write a series of books journeys of
the journeys of the Soul journey of
Souls and Destiny of souls in which he
basically compiled what his clients were
telling him about the interlife state
and in there it becomes it's part of his
discovery that people choose consciously
their present the conditions of their
present life that there is a process
when you die there is a debriefing
process a process of integrating back
into the soul integrating into the world
of spirit a process of maybe healing
some of the unhappinesses that have been
collected in your present lifetime but
then there is a period of refreshment
and restoration and learning continues
and there is a social structure to the
the post-mortem condition
but there comes a time when it's time
for class to resume it's the soul begins
a process of choosing the conditions of
its next incarnation
this is that that basic that's really
opens up a whole new understanding in
this sense uh no I think that
just as kids and people in college some
people choose their courses very
carefully and systematically with great
forethought and some people choose their
courses kind of haphazardly or randomly
just picking what comes what works in
their work schedule and they get
different results I think it may be also
the case for the soul some Souls choose
more carefully than other Souls but the
idea that we choose our Incarnation we
choose the circumstances of our
Incarnation that it's an intelligent
process and by
making choices of what we want to
experience doing our best in that
experience expanding out by becoming
male female Rich poor Warrior priests
artists all these different varieties
we grow faster than we would grow if we
lived all these years as one person the
same person so sometimes with my
students I would say
imagine that you're the creative
intelligence of the universe
and you had two options you could create
a life that would live a hundred
thousand years
or you could create a life that would
live the same hundred thousand years but
in Hundred Year increments and every
hundred years they would change the
circumstances of the life
at the end of a hundred years which do
you think would produce the greater
learning
and I think it's clear that the Hundred
Year increment life would produce the
greater learning
that's understanding that underneath the
short-term experience of our present
life there is an accumulation taking
place at the level of the soul that the
soul is learning
the soul is accumulating the experiences
of all of our many many lifetimes and
they aren't that learning is not
necessarily present in each individual
life but it's holding them like a
library uh in the spiritual reality
now this was
I saw this also in my sessions I I
experienced in some cases former lives
with people that I was engaged in in
this present lifetime there was healing
that took place in these encounters
but I also was taken into a series of
experiences which pushed the boundaries
there was a particular session
which I call the birth of the diamond
soul
in which I experienced
all of my former lives coming into me
very quick just there was tremendous
work had been done earlier in the
session and I was in a state where I was
just
seemingly integrating streams of
Consciousness from multiple lifetimes
and it was like wrapping string around a
kite spool filaments of white light and
they seemed to hit a critical mass at
one point and when they hit a critical
mass they fused all these lives fused
into a single energy entity and when
they fused there was an explosion
of diamond light that it just exploded
from my chest and it catapulted me into
a completely different state of
consciousness
I was an individual
but I was an individual Beyond any frame
of reference that I had previously known
I wasn't Chris Bash
but I was a being that Chris bash was
part of and all of these other farmer
lives were part of and this is what I
came to call the birth of the diamond
soul and it is the idea that
life grows that part of the intelligent
process of life is growing human
consciousness layer by layer semester by
semester as it were grade by grade
course by course allowing us to expand
and grow hopefully more intelligent more
compassionate we make mistakes we learn
but we learn from those mistakes we grow
we grow
the process is not simply about becoming
incrementally gradually
more than we were sooner or later there
comes a time when all of those lives all
of their learning fuse
and the Soul Consciousness awakens
within us
I think in the normal process of
reincarnation we experience our soul
when we die so we go from ego to soul
back to Ego back to Soul but if we keep
this up
thousands and thousands of years
thousands of years sooner or later it's
a natural process that the soul wakes up
inside time and space
I think this is what's happening not
only for us individually but it's what's
happening for us as a species we are in
the process through our long long
history our long evolutionary Journey
our long learning process we are in the
process of transcending the ego and
waking up the soul is waking up inside
time and space
this is I think history is taking us
into a time into an epic when the
diamond soul is waking up on Earth
that's uh that's beautiful
um concerning this vision of
reincarnation that you gained uh through
your experiences and through your
reading there are three particular
issues that I two particular questions
that I have which I think are very
difficult to answer and they arise
as many other issues from the fact that
it's difficult to talk about these
things
um but the first issue everybody knows
how can reincarnation how can
Consciousness travel from one biological
mechanism into another but we can leave
that alone because it's probably Beyond
each one of us at the moment but then
two others I think the answer is we
don't know yeah no we don't know what
the physics of the soul is we don't know
how our memories leave our biological
base and how Consciousness kind of
reprograms or returns to and integrates
with the new biological body we just
don't have the answer to that question
but we won't begin to find the answers
to that question and still we start
asking different questions we have to
open up to a more complex cosmology of a
multi-level universe and stop
acting as if our Consciousness is being
generated and created by our brain
that's a reductive cosmology which
doesn't allow us to even begin to find
the answers to the question you're
asking so I hope you're right we don't
know but I think in time we'll get more
and more knowledge in that area
yeah hopefully that's that would be a
very interesting thing to realize how it
works but also when you talk about the
soul that's something that I'm very
interested in because let's say if
somebody's just doing a meditation
practice one of the key insights I think
of meditation is non-self non-duality uh
the co-arising of of everything so how
does that stack up with the idea of a
soul reincarnating and what is
incriminating is is it the doer that the
thing that makes choices in the life or
is it the witness the the thing that
kind of just is conscious of all these
things
yeah
uh I've had those experiences of
non-duality and what Buddhism calls
emptiness
emptiness of self where there is an
experience of such intimacy that there
is no self inside you and also no self
anywhere in the world everything is just
open and pours and
magnificent experience
and I think it depends on how you think
of the Soul if you think of the Soul
and I think this is kind of the way we
have by habit and by custom have thought
of the soul in the past it's kind of
what I think of as an atomistic theory
of the soul and contrast to a Quantum or
field theory of the Soul if you think of
the Soul as a fundamentally isolated
unit
which does not change
and is fundamentally isolated from other
souls or other beings then you have a
problem because non-duality and shunyata
Emptiness is cut is it contradicts that
atomistic notion of the soul but if you
have kind of a Quantum model of the Soul
if you have a soul as a field as a as a
learning system which is never isolated
from the surrounding being surrounded
from the surrounding World which is
always in an energetic exchange with
that world it's always kind of
incorporating information and energy for
other in the waves of life then I think
we can concept understand an
understanding of Soul which is one
Dynamic it's always changing it's never
fixed it's always evolving Through Time
and it's porous it's a reality which is
porous and yet it has individual like an
individuality it has it is
I think the the universe is a learning
environment it's learning in so many
ways it's learning at a at a species
level but it's also learning at an
individual level we are learning we are
growing we are holding on to our
experience we remember our experience we
acquire insights on the basis of that
experience it doesn't mean we're
isolated from the world and it doesn't
mean we're static but we are developing
an individuality which is a porous
individuality so in the end I don't
think there is any contradiction between
affirming
an emergent individuality in creation
and the fundamental condition of
non-duality and I think this is also
affirmed in the spiritual Traditions
even the Dalai Lama has written that
what Buddhism rejects in rejecting it in
its anata Doctrine it's no self Doctrine
what it's rejecting is not individuality
what it's rejecting is a static soul the
soul was just in change in time and a
soul which is independent of other
realities independent of surrounding
reality once you want to once you kind
of shift your understanding of soul
to this kind of open field Vision then I
think it's completely compatible with
shinyata
emptiness
and this open field vision of the cell I
think it's also kind of leads into your
observation that um
Enlightenment isn't a private process
you were talking about how in particular
one thing I found very interesting is
you would talk about how your
experiences of purification and healing
you could see them affecting not only
your personal sphere but also the larger
Collective of humanity which I found
very interesting and I wanted to
understand how that how that works and
how that feeds into your vision of the
future human
and yes please tell us a bit more about
that
oh that's a big question
uh you know what I began this work I
thought I was doing this work for my
personal edification you know from my
personal healing maybe even my personal
spiritual realization
but I found that even though that was
maybe my mindset that wasn't the
universe's mindset it wasn't what was
going on from its end
uh the mystery of the collective
ramifications of our work the collective
import of our work it's only a mystery
if we start with the assumption that we
are fundamentally private entities
but in the nature of the experience both
in classical meditative spiritual
deepening and in psychedelic spiritual
deepening we discover that that's not
the case
we discover that we are always and
forever and always have been always will
be part of an interwoven network of life
and the image I like to use for this is
the image of a tree and a leaf leaf
Consciousness and tree Consciousness so
imagine you were seeing a tree
where all you could see all the leaves
and imagine all the leaves were
individually conscious they had
individual personalities and imagine
that everything that was covered in bark
was invisible
so all you could see were the leaves but
you could not see the trunk and the
limbs of the tree
and imagine that one of these leaves
decides to explore what is the real
nature of his or her being so he goes
deep within and he finds that place in
their inner being where they connect to
the twig and pushing their Consciousness
deeper into the twig into the limb into
the branch eventually into the very core
of the tree and suddenly has the
exploding awareness of what a tree is
sees the tree experiences the tree and
therefore knows what a leaf is belief is
not a separate private part a leaf is a
living aspect of a much deeper larger
being and that the well-being of the
leaf is connected to the well-being of
all the other leaves in the tree that we
truly are all in this together and when
that awareness dawns
then
if that
Consciousness Works its way back up into
its Leaf again back into its leafness
now it sees all the other leaves in the
tree as an aspect of it of this deeper
identity which all leaves share it would
also say strange things like there is no
self
it is anata meaning there is no private
self we're all here together
compassion would spontaneously manifest
because you one would know that what you
do to another Leaf you do to yourself
because you're doing it to the tree
we're all individually connected
these are things that surface in all
deep spiritual traditions
in the Psychedelic practice
what I found is that when I would open
deeply within quote myself I would be
involved in healing work and cleansing
work
that was not related to my personal
history but expanded beyond my personal
history in some way it would be as if
I were working to heal all the leaves on
one particular branch of this particular
tree
and and this just happened spontaneously
because nature doesn't hold the
boundaries that we imagine exist in our
private small mind nature lives as an
integrated whole our species lives as an
integrated totality so it's just natural
that when we open up to that totality as
we do with psychedelics we we enter into
and we can dissolve completely into that
reality so it's not just that the leaf
has a leaf experience of the tree the
leaf can dissolve into the essence of
the tree and experience how the tree
experiences life
the same thing happens in psychedelic
work we enter into purification
processes which affect the tree walls
around us and we enter into ecstatic
Joy ecstatic experiences of intimacy
with life intimacy with the Divine which
naturally you can't contain it it
naturally radiates through your
awareness
into the awareness of all the beings
around you all spiritual Traditions have
recognized that our spiritual practice
radiates through the fabric of the world
not just the human fabric but the fabric
of all reality also the the animal
fabric of the world
so
you know I'm getting a little lost in
the thought of that it's just it's just
it becomes so natural it becomes such a
a repeated experience that
um
it helps me understand in some ways the
Buddhist tradition that at the beginning
of every meditation session or any
spiritual practice You Begin by
cultivating what they call bodhichitta
which is the desire to save all sentient
beings so you open
you're doing this practice not for your
personal benefit you're doing it for all
beings at the end of your practice you
give away all the benefit to all the
beings of the universe at all the levels
so what you're doing is not just for
your it's not for your own benefit
you're doing it for the benefit of the
totality and in doing that you
strengthen your awareness that you are
fractal aspect of the totality and in
that awareness there is great Liberation
there is great joy
because you know you're you just allow
yourself to live and begin to live the
larger life and the larger life is what
all the spiritual teachers and Saints
have been talking about
the The Compassion that treats your
enemy as as friends The Compassion where
you open into deep time and you know
that you are more that you
are not just the small you which usually
takes so much of our time and attention
you know that what you are
is a piece of life
which has infinite extension an infinite
range in reach
and in that knowledge
there is the Great relaxation the great
joy you just
it dissolves alienation it dissolves
loneliness
one becomes once again what one has
always been but forgets
one becomes a joyful aspect of the
totality
foreign
just all the quotes that I have taken
from your book and so difficult choosing
which one to go with uh but there is one
one particular section in which you I'm
going to coach you directly
um here you talk about kind of the
purpose of this whole exercise of
reincarnation and learning and um you
say you say on the other hand I also
felt an Exquisite tenderness coming from
the Creator who experienced with us
every pain we have taken upon ourselves
humans were so precious to the Creator
that not a single ounce of pain not
single cure was wasted the depth of that
Divine care so moved me that no
sacrifice seems too large or
unreasonable and I think here you're
talking about all the suffering that is
involved in this process of learning and
of a vision in which all this kind of
made sense for you as as in it it didn't
seem as meaningless suffering anymore
um but this reminds me of
I don't know if you if you've ever read
uh the brothers Karma by Dostoevsky it's
a great novel that talks about these
issues and at one point there these two
brothers and Ivanka and they discussed
the existence of God and basically Allah
is a faithful kind of servant of God
very pure of Hearts but it's not so
smart and then there is ivankaramazov
who is exceptionally he's essentially a
genius uh successful in every manner you
can imagine but a complete atheist and
when he talks about why he rejects God
he gives Pages upon pages of examples of
Cruelty inflicted upon children and
actually the statistics had taken that
out of actual accounts of uh children
being tortured being killed being maimed
then this is very interesting because it
reminds me of your experiences where at
a certain point of your journey you were
faced by this not just images
experiences of children being killed the
killing of the children and yes exactly
yeah and I think that is really the
ultimate argument you can raise against
this
come what justifies the suffering of
innocent beings what can justify this
this the suffering because eventually
ivank karamazov says perhaps there is a
God maybe I do believe in God that I do
not accept the world that he has created
so what's your comment on this
um
that is the the hardest part of all of
it isn't it
uh how can we affirm
and intelligence let alone a compassion
behind existence operating through
existence when everywhere we look around
us there is so much pain so much
brutality so much horror compounding
over and over again
so much suffering
you know ramakrishna the great Hindu
Saint he said if you want to understand
God
you must be willing to look suffering in
the face
and I really
I hold that and I I really respect that
and I think it's really true you you
can't you must understand suffering you
must confront suffering and engage
suffering if you have any hope of
understanding
the True Divine now
I'm really I'm very comfortable with
atheism and Atheism is a rejection of
theism and depending upon the theism
that we're talking about most of the
theisms that I know deserve to be
rejected most of them are too small most
of them are the the gods of so many
religions or
terrifyingly small and the the vision of
life that comes with them are
terrifyingly inaccurate in and
inadequate uh and do not provide
anywhere near an adequate understanding
existence to help us understand the
enormous pain that we're seeing
and I don't think I'm going to be able
to succeed and and answering this
question satisfactory but it's a
question I live with and so I can only
offer you a few things
foreign
the suffering in life
we also have to understand genius in
life
in order to understand what's happening
in life's deficiencies
children who are born without brains you
know without you know we have to
understand the larger trajectory of life
my sense of it is and my experience it
is when I have dissolved into what I
experience as the creative intention of
the Universe I dissolved into a process
of creation a process of
manifestations self-manifestation first
that was just
vast just huge and ancient just
extraordinarily
old been going on so long billions
billions of years
13.8 billion years they tell us since
this big bang and we're not at all sure
that this is the first of the big Banks
you know so and that the creative
capacity of the universe extends not
just to you know the the microorganisms
the organisms on this planet but entire
galaxies and and stars and the
collapsing of stars and the emerging of
planets and the evolution of life on the
planets and just countless galaxies
countless galaxies so
we now are the first generation to truly
appreciate the scale of the universe
that we're involved in both of its age
and its expanse and we've all been
fascinated by the wonderful images
coming from the Hubble telescope and
other pre other Scopes that are giving
us these magnificent pictures of the
scale
of existence
and it's in that context I think that we
have to look at our own existence our
own species existence and ask
what are we doing what's Happening Here
If there is intelligence how is this
intelligence expressing itself here in
our life and in particular why is it so
hard
why is life so hard why couldn't life be
made easier it's like so I can believe
in God but I don't believe in I don't
accept the universe that this God has
created
and
and I agree with
those deep sentiments because they honor
our children they honor life and there
is no justification on the surface like
that for their suffering and their pain
foreign but again if we look at this in
a context
a human being is a growing intelligence
a human being is growing and its growth
rests upon the shoulders of the primate
Kingdom which rests upon the shoulders
of of other life forms which preceded
the primates and so on down the
evolutionary ladder
if we want to assess the condition and
judge the conditions certainly we have
to ask ourselves the question
foreign
are we at the end of this process are we
are we all that there is is this where
it's going to end is this is this what's
happening if you go to see a play and
it's a 10 act play and you're only in
the first scene of the First Act clearly
you don't have enough information to
know whether the play is a good play you
must see it through to the end if you're
on a car assembly plant and you're only
at station three and they're 215
Stations of the simply plant and you're
seeing something being built but you
don't even see enough to understand
where it's going or what it is then you
just can't understand the process
and part of the advantages or one of the
great advantages of working with
psychedelic States is that it allows you
under certain conditions to expand
Beyond this moment of time be it allows
you to expand and to dissolve not only
into the intelligence that's manifesting
as the universe that's manifesting as
the life forms in the universe but it
also allows you to experience not only
the distant past of this
self-manifesting universe but also the
future of this self-manifesting universe
entering into what I call Deep time
and my experiences in deep time have
convinced me that there are dimensions
in which the universe knows itself which
go far beyond this present moment and in
those
Encounters in those dissolving into the
deep future
I've been able to experience or have
been given the experiences of something
of the creative process something of the
how creativity is expressing itself in
human beings
and we come here to make choices we make
choices and we learned we make bad
choices we have bad consequences we make
good choices we have better consequences
but we're just getting started we only
became self-aware about 5 000 years ago
I mean we only became aware of the
Consciousness that lies at the center of
our being our common our deep
Consciousness we only began to have
access to that about 5 000 years ago
self-awareness came earlier but what the
self is began about 5 000 years ago and
we are just getting started we are just
beginning to exercise the full potential
which lies latent within the human being
and in that process in that creative
process we are dealing with a very
incomplete
creation a very incomplete
planet
an incomplete species and a species
which in some ways is still living out
of very barbaric primitive
levels of self-understanding and in its
primitiveness inflicts great damage
on the beings around it it's like the
pain of being an individual Leaf is so
terrible we go insane and we inflict
damage on other leaves
but it's not just that it's like
the process of evolution itself is
incomplete is still working it out
working things out the process of
organic evolution is incomplete
SRI arbindo said humanity is a
transitional species
we are not the end of the line we are
simply a transition going from a lower
order of awareness into a higher order
of awareness when then when we stabilize
at a higher level of awareness we're
going into yet unhire and a higher level
of awareness
the ability of mine to be able to
influence matter the ability of mind to
be able to manifest
Joy Grace fruition inside matter is
still being developed the ability of our
mind to be able to control the diseases
of the body they're still being
developed we are basically so profoundly
incomplete
nature is so profoundly incomplete
my basic response to suffering is that
it does reflect in certain ways the
incompleteness of the universe it also
reflects
the terrifying demands of learning
through experience of experiencing the
consequences in some instances not at
all but in some instances of learn of
inheriting the consequences of choices
that we've made so that we can learn
from those choices and make better
choices in the future but not all
suffering really derives from Human
choices at all some suffering just
divides from what we would call the
cruelties of nature this planet is a
severe Place hurricanes come through and
wipe out thousands of lives earthquakes
wipe out thousands of lives biology
takes out thousands of children
foreign
this is a very very intense world
we must be willing to look suffering in
the face if we want to understand the
deeper
the deeper intentionality that is
expressing itself
In This Very incomplete place and time
we tend to sort of see God as all
perfect and static and unchanging and
therefore we hold God responsible for
making this that and the other but I
don't think that's the way it is at all
we are cells in the being of God we are
cells in the being of the Divine the
Divine is not separate from any of the
pain that the children are experiencing
the Divine is not other than or distant
from what's going on what's taking place
but we are cells within the emerging the
Divine we are aspects of its so the pain
is always felt always registered always
held we are all in this together and we
are growing together now here's the
thing
if we were to stop the whole process
right now if we were to hold the
creative intent the designer accountable
for just where we are right now that we
would have to conclude
it's a bastard he's a bastard because
it's just too much pain there's too much
pain
but if we were able to go forward in
time if we could go even such a short
distance of time of a hundred thousand
years from now
and experience an evolved Humanity what
we are becoming what we are in the
process of becoming we would experience
a much Kinder Humanity a much more
gracious Humanity a much more
intelligent Humanity a much more
compassionate Humanity
a Humanity that
was much better able to manage still the
fluctuations of nature which are so
painful and so catastrophic and we just
it's hard to Envision where this is
going where this is taking us
now this brings me to the the deeper
part of your question where are we now
in this process where what is what's
happening in our historical
circumstances what is the future
immediate future for our species
and here
I know that I'm sharing just my own
Visionary experiences I know that what
may be powerful and true for one person
would not necessarily be powerful or
true for another person
so I can only share with you what my
experience has been
early on in my sessions
all starting around the 23rd session so
for the last 50 of my sessions one of
the recurring themes of my sessions was
that where humanity is going where we're
what's happening and the vision was over
and over repeated we are coming into a
turning point in history we're coming
into a decisive before and after Point
uh that we were poised on the edge of a
magnificent transition into a higher
level of functioning that there was that
there was a greatness in emerging within
humanity and when I look around at
history I thought I'd say well I don't
exactly see that I see people being just
as stupid now as they were you know 5
000 years ago in so many ways and just
as cruel but my sessions kept saying no
no look deeper there is an emerging
greatness in humanity and again I
understand this within reincarnation
there is
to see humanity is not just to see the
present generation but it's to see the
living
pulsing of life incarnating again and
again over many thousands of years and
the greatness that is emerging is the
greatness that's emerging
at that deeper level of accumulation of
the Soul which is collecting and
harvesting all the learning all the
suffering all the experimentation all
the courage all the Innovation that's
been we're cultivating through all of
these lifetimes
so the my sessions kept showing me that
there is a greatness emerging
in the human
story and that there was a we were
coming into a decisive turning point in
history but it never showed me how it
was going to realize this I had no idea
how this was going to come about
and then in the 55th session
it took me into what I call the Great
Awakening session it took me deep into
the future and it took me there
in order to allow me to experience the
death and rebirth
of the human species
and I don't mean that as a physical
death and rebirth but a sort of
psychospiritual death and rebirth but a
death and rebirth that did involve much
physical suffering in many deaths
and I had this experience not as Chris
beige or not as even crispation of an
expanded version of myself but I had the
experience
as the entire species my Consciousness
had dissolved into the collective psyche
so that experienced a profound
Crescendo of suffering
and a birth coming out of this suffering
that was a birth of a new human being a
new form of human being
basically I experienced a historical
period of an unraveling loss of control
an inability to control the
circumstances of our life a tremendous
kind of confronting of the sins of the
fathers we are our own fathers of course
who are confronting of our past a
confronting of all the foibles and the
limitations and the divisiveness of
history and the short-sightedness of our
forms of governance that we had emerged
and it it was a Global Systems crisis it
seemed to be driven by a global
ecological crisis but a Global Systems
crisis where Humanity was basically
forced ultimately into simply trying to
survive and for a time it looked like
we weren't going to survive it looked
like it was an Extinction event it
looked like
we were going to lose our place in
existence altogether
but just when the storm was at its peak
just when things were at their worst
it was as if a hurricane passed over the
island
and the skies began to clear
and when the skies began to clear there
were many survivors there had been many
deaths but there were many survivors
and when the survivors began to pick
themselves up and began to move forward
and find each other they're sprang forth
from within each of them individually
and from within
the collective
new ways of knowing new ways of feeling
new understandings new insights
fundamentally at its core there was the
birth of an appreciation of Oneness an
experience of Oneness not as a theory
not as kind of an ideology but an
experience of that tree that underlies
individual Leaf Consciousness that we
truly are one we truly are connected to
each other and in that birth of that
awareness
we began to build a new world
not the World created by the ego and the
ego is a magnificent expression of
creativity the ego is magnificent but
the ego is divided from the fundamental
Springs of of
Consciousness and from each other and
the world with your ego has created is a
divided world it's a it's a world which
favors some portions of society it
thinks the expense of others it's not a
world that works for all
foreign
with the birth of Oneness with the birth
of this transformation we began to build
a new world we began to build a world
which truly truly did work for all in
which there was
it was truly a new beginning and this
creativity these new ideas they fed upon
themselves so there was a cascading of
of more and more Beauty more and more
knowledge more and more understanding
and I think what was taking place what I
experienced was a collective birth of
the diamond soul that the soul was
waking up on Earth that we were waking
up and understanding ourselves to be not
simply hundred-year-old beings we were
waking up and experiencing ourselves to
be hundred thousand year old beings with
relationships a hundred thousand years
old and in that awareness we not only
experienced a much deeper compassion
with other human beings and other life
forms altogether but we experienced
greater transparency to the creative
intelligence of the universe itself we
were no longer experientially isolated
from the cosmic intelligence of the
universe but we could take in deeper
downloads
from the intelligence of the universe
and with these deeper downloads there
was no technological problem which we
could not solve
because we were awake intellectually at
deeper levels we could understand things
understandings came easier there was no
technological barriers to what we could
accomplish in this world
this is the birth what I call the birth
of the future human and I think the
future human is the diamond soul
incarnating in history
in my one of the last great vision of my
journey in the 70th session
when I thought I was beyond all the
meltdowns that I'd gone through before
I'd gone through so many meltdowns it
put me through the worst stripped down
of my entire 20-year Journey it just
broke me down terribly
and I think it was necessary in order to
give me the experiences that followed
and it took me deeper into the future
than it had ever taken me before
and in this condition one of the
experiences that unfolded there is that
it gave me yet again and my deepest
experience of the future human it was as
if I was allowed to try on for size the
new archetype of the new human that had
emerged had been birthed
in the in evolution
and just touching this being
was so extraordinary just
if I try to describe it
I don't think I can do it without crying
just a magnificent Beauty just a
completely healed Humanity healed of all
the scars that had accumulated through
all those thousands of years of
incarnating a heart an ex explosively
large heart a magnificent a magnificent
mind under capable of Illumination that
staggers the imagination this is the
child which we're trying to give birth
to this is a child which I think we are
beginning to give birth to in this
century
I think we are entering the dark night
of our Collective Soul and just as in
mystical Traditions before in order for
full spiritual realization to emerge
there must take place
a dark night of our soul which is a time
of purification a time of confronting
the poisons that are left over from our
past behaviors and opening and as this
Dark Night comes to fruition there is a
a death a death to that old self and a
birth of something new and when that new
opens it basically all the mystics and
all the great Saints tell us the same
thing it makes all the purification
worthwhile it makes all the hardships
worthwhile that's when a mother gives
birth when she holds her child then the
Pains of Labor are forgotten it they're
worthwhile
I think something like that is happening
for Humanity we are in the process we
have been gestating the new Humanity for
thousands and hundreds of thousands of
years reincarnation Lifetime by LifeTime
we've been gestating the new Humanity
gestation takes a long time
birth is a short time birth is a very
intense process and I think we are in a
collective Dark Night of the of the Soul
now we may just be in the early stages
of it I think we are maybe in what John
of the Cross called The Dark Knight of
the self which is the early stage of
purification and transformation but
these will be followed by deeper
purification deeper transformation until
eventually
will let go of our past until eventually
when it hurts so much to stay as we were
will begin to open up into who we can be
and who we need to be in order to save
life on this planet
in that process I think we're giving
birth to the new Humanity
and when we give birth to the new
Humanity we will look back over the
whole of human evolution and all the
suffering that has been involved and we
will say not that it wasn't real not
that it wasn't terrible but that in a
larger order of things it was worth it
because now we are operating at a
completely different blueprint
of the human psyche
so I think we're in hard times we're in
for Hard Times ahead but I think these
are magnificently important times
extremely creative times and times which
will demand a great deal from us
individually and collectively but if we
engage them conscientiously if we engage
them heart and soul
I think they're going to change our life
individually and the life of our
children and our grandchildren our
great-grandchildren forever
so that's that's the visions that were
poured into me and so that's I just
share them with you
wow that's uh
it really leaves me speechless it's hard
it's hard now I want to say to that
that's beautiful absolutely beautiful
uh
I can see how
I can see how that removes any anxiety
really about death and about life and
about the future of us
um as individuals of species it's just a
beautiful beautiful vision
so
every time we die you know of course at
a deepest level all the spiritual
Traditions tell us no one dies
we just transition into a different
level of reality and I'm not making
light of death and I'm not trivializing
at all but just affirming this deeper
Insight that
everything we are
survives the death of this body
and at the end of every lifetime we
return to where we came from
as a resting place
and we are restored and refreshed and
then we return to the challenges of
History
you know so it's it's
we don't have to go through all the
evolutionary future
in order to know
freedom from fear of death
in fact one of the if they were one
thing for my psychedelic experiences
that I wish I could I could give to the
world it would be eliminating the fear
of death
and I not only am not afraid of dying
I'm looking forward to it
because death is homecoming always death
is homecoming
I know different spiritual Traditions
have said that in different ways but I
find Carl Jung's he says at one point
that life is a short period between two
Infinities which in the end might just
be one so I think that's a beautiful way
of putting it yeah um beautifully said
yeah there is one more thing that he
says that I want to ask how you see this
in light of your experiences para young
used to say I can I can either be good
or I can be whole so he had a tremendous
respect for the dark side of the psyche
for evil
so how do you see that do you see evil
falling away as our Eagles fall away
when we become this future human or do
you see some deeper logic people
continuing and becoming integrated and
then serving some higher purpose
foreign
by differentiating between darkness and
Evil
people often fuse those but I think
they're they're different
uh Darkness
evil is a kind of
a twisting of life it is a a process in
which life in some way has turned in
upon itself and has cut itself so deeply
off from its source that it has become
Twisted cancerous
and needs to be
restored needs to be healed Darkness on
the other hand is simply part of the
inertia of existence it's part it's kind
of like what
what the big bang explodes into it's
what it's what is the resistance to the
creative process itself
but I think when when young talked about
I'd rather be hold and be good he was
claiming all the parts of his life which
weren't necessarily socially good or
even that he would deem good he was
claiming the whole of his life and I
think that's what happens in spiritual
practice and it certainly happens in
psychedelic practice we grab the whole
of our life we grab all aspects of it
even the parts that that we're
embarrassed by and the parts we're
ashamed of are the parts that we feel
are unforgivable we embrace them all and
as we embrace them all all those twisted
or unintegrated or injured aspects of
ourself
are brought back into healing and are
brought back into wholeness so that
there emerges
out of that wholeness a higher order of
goodness
a different order of goodness
but it is it it is that commitment to
embracing the shadow to let no corner
of our being be excluded from Redemption
we might say nothing can be left out
otherwise the the system is incomplete
it's like there's a chorus but some of
the voices are gone we have to have all
of them present for the course to be
complete
so that in evolution
in our social evolution in our spiritual
Evolution clearly there is much darkness
in the world there is much twisted
so we could say there is much evil but I
don't think of evil as a cosmological
process I've never experienced it that
way I've never experienced evil in that
way I experience Darkness I've
experienced confusion I've experienced
pain and suffering
but not evil as such and I think that's
what SRI arabindo I mean Rama Krishna
met when he said if you want to
understand God you must look suffering
in the face
and suffering doesn't come from a second
principle it doesn't come from an evil
demiurge it comes from the Divine
suffering is part of the Divine
expression we have to understand how
life works
and we must look deep if we're going to
see the compassion and existence we must
be able to look very very deep because
there is so much suffering but and I
think the suffering is in the process of
being redeemed in history in the sense
that it is part of a self-learning
process
which is taking us somewhere and it's
taking us somewhere exciting and
somewhere magnificent
so I guess I would say that darkness is
being redeemed in evolution uh
I don't think I don't know what will
happen as we make this transition into
this higher form of humanity I'm sure
that even if we did make this transition
within a thousand years say or even
sooner into a higher manifestation of
Human Experience on the planet it
doesn't end there you know it's we're
going to keep going for millions of more
years billions of more years
uh so I'm sure there will be challenges
that we'll face there'll be thresholds
that we'll face
but along the way I think we're we just
have to let go of some of the early
stories that we've been telling
ourselves that somehow evil has its hand
on the earth or somehow that there is a
malevolent force that intends us to
suffer this way or that we can escape
this suffering by simply being good
experiencing salvation and and going to
heaven when we die and leaving the Earth
behind and just not being here anymore
we just have to let go of a lot of our
old stories and open up into a deeper
understanding of the cosmological
process of creation
self-manifestation of the creative
intelligence
Chris um I realize that I'm taking quite
a lot of your time so
um before we finish I want to ask you
now that you've written your book
because uh correct me if I'm wrong
button you uh discontinued you finished
your LSD sessions and then it took 20
years was it and then you published your
your book 20 years later
so
so how has the writing of your book and
then doing of you know speaking about
your experiences how has that changed
your insights and what is left for you
to do in this lifetime what uh yes
learn to cook well
maybe let me back up a little bit and
describe what happened when I stopped my
work uh because that'll lead into the
writing of the book
um
I stopped my work in 99 and I stopped it
for a number of reasons
but foremost among them
I stopped it because
the the domain of diamond Luminosity
that I entered and in those last five
years and 26 sessions I entered this
reality only four times
and in between those four entrances into
the diamond Luminosity they were very
very intense purifications and healings
and catharsis that were taking place
but
I entered that Joy of dissolving into
the light
and it made coming back I reached a
point where
it was just too painful to come back
into time space
and
there was a sadness in coming back
and I knew I had to uh
I couldn't take being separated from the
universe that deep intimacy again I
couldn't take entering into the joy and
then coming back out of the joy anymore
that I had to let go
uh there were other things going on I
was also running enormous energy in my
body that I realized I was really kind
of at a subtle energy level I was
running too hot I needed to stop and let
my system calm down and let my subtle
Energy System recalibrate
but the primary reason I stopped is
because of a heartache I couldn't
I couldn't take coming back anymore so I
stopped and I had been given so many
blessings through the years and had been
shown so many things that I thought I
could just stop and I would continue to
be nourished by the treasures that I had
been given by the diamonds that I had
been given
and it that's true and that did happen
but that turned out to be only half of
what happened
I found over the years that followed
a deep sadness emerging in my life
and I I began to realize that underneath
all the things I was doing publishing
and writing and taking care of my
children and teaching
that there was a a sadness a longing
that I was suffering from a loss of
communion with the Divine I was
suffering
from a loneliness with the divine
and I basically was just waiting to die
I was living my life taking care of
everybody but in my heart I was just
waiting to die
so I could return to my beloved
and years went on and it didn't get
better
and I began to realize that this is not
this is not good it's not good living
your life waiting to die it's good to be
completely Fearless of death but it's
not good to be waiting to die that
somewhere along the way I must have made
a mistake I must have done something
wrong somewhere
my life was screaming failure to
integrate
but because I had taken so much care to
integrate each individual session it
wasn't clear where my failure lie lay so
I turned to find
where I had made a mistake
and in time I came to understand that
there was an imbalance in my life it was
like I had plunged myself so deep into
the Transcendent divine that I had lost
my foothold in the Manifest Divine I had
gone so deep into the Transcendent
dimension that I had lost hold of the
other truth I mean I knew it
intellectually but I wasn't able to live
it fully and that is the truth at the
physical universe and my being as part
of the physical universe is the Divine
the physical world is the body of the
Divine
so
when I began to see that the problem was
this imbalance between Transcendence and
imminence I made a decisive move to
embrace
the my physical existence more
completely to really by a force of will
and by a cultivation of practices
to live my life as I was in his
incompleteness for the remaining days on
this Earth and to recommit myself to
being here inside time and space on this
planet
and as part of this process and it took
me about 10 years to get fully
comfortable
being inside time and space again
and which is maybe one more reason why
no one should do the kind of work that I
did you know I hope that people don't
have to go through what I went through I
think maybe it's better to work in
smaller Doses and more incremental
stages and make maybe smaller progress
but also hold on to more of the progress
that you do make in opening up to
Transcendence
but along the way I also learned that
there was a second reason for my kind of
estrangement or unhappiness and the
second reason was
what I call the sickness of Silence
I'm a teacher I love to learn and I love
to share what I've learned
but because of the laws surrounding
psychedelics and because of the our
psychedelic phobic culture I wasn't
allowed to talk about what I experienced
I wasn't allowed to bring my psychedelic
knowledge into the classroom I wasn't
allowed to share it with my colleagues
so the silence which had allowed me to
do this work
at this time in history was also
not allowing me to fully integrate it
into my personal life into my public
life I integrated them privately
psychologically as best I could but I
couldn't integrate them into my
historical presence
I couldn't be in the real world in the
physical world who I knew myself to be
in the shamanic world
and in this respect writing diamonds
from Heaven has been a deep healing
process to finally now that I've I've
retired and I retired a little early in
order to write this book but to finally
be in a position where I'm able to say
what I did to say what happened to me in
these sessions and to share
the experience of the universe and not
that I think my experiences in any way
unique or special because it's just I'm
one person among a whole psychedelic
Community that's having all of these
types of experiences but to finally be
able to be completely honest and candid
that this is what I've been doing all
these years this is who I am in my inner
life
behind my public Persona of my academic
that has been very healing and it's also
done some interesting things
as I've was working on the book and the
years working on the book and as I've
begun to talk about it
my psychedelic memories have begun to
congeal and to live in me differently
than they lived in me before I was
talking so just to be able to talk about
these things with you and and with other
people
has allowed me to be more whole Within
Myself it's like the Psychedelic half of
my life and the physical half of my life
are coming together
and something is happening uh something
there is a deepening of integration and
a deepening of transparency to spiritual
reality and I don't know where it's
going to go I truly don't I think in
three years from now I could be in a
very different place than I am now and
I'm in a different place now than I was
before I wrote the book
so I think you know the pin van lomal is
a near-death episode researcher and he
wrote a wonderful book on near-death
episodes
and he says at the end of the book that
his experience with people have
near-death experiences is that
integration can't really take place
until they can talk about their
experiences and share them
and I think that's true with psychedelic
experiences too that at some levels we
can't fully integrate our experiences
until we can share them
and I think
writing diamonds from Heaven has been
part of sharing my history hopefully
that'll be useful to other people and
it'll support them in their work and and
as we go into this intense historical
period
so what
there's been a
a
birth of a new joy in a way a birth of
just being able to be
Who I Really Am which is a flawed human
being who's had some pretty unusual
experiences and uh loves to be in
conversation with other human beings who
have also had unusual experiences so
that we can together see what our
experiences have taught us about the
universe that we're in
okay
yeah well Chris your uh experiences and
your words are truly diamonds from
heaven and I'm sincerely grateful and I
want to express your gratitude for for a
while for your courage to undertake
these experiences and to share them and
to speak about them not just to me but
to so many people and I know I can speak
for myself and I know for others that
you're at work really touches people's
uh people's hearts and people's lives
and I think it's very important work so
I really thank you on the behalf of not
only myself but the greater Collective
um so I thank you very much
um again I I really don't want to take
too much of your day but is there
anything that we didn't touch that you'd
like to talk about
hmm
maybe just one piece
because I think there's a lesson for me
in this and maybe a lesson for others
I had an experience in the 50th session
which was the second Diamond Luminosity
session the second time I was taken deep
into Diamond luminosity
and so this was the deepest I ever got
in any of my sessions into the deep
structure of the universe and I was in a
place of extraordinary Bliss and joy and
I had dissolved completely into the
boundaryless condition of just pure
light just hyper hyper clear clear light
that's so clear
and Justin when I was at this peak of 50
sessions and and all these years of
experience
all of a sudden my entire visual field
rotated 90 degrees and a space opened up
and I saw reality far far in the
distance
filled with an even higher form of
polite and a beam of light came out of
that reality and hit me and it
absolutely shattered me
and I realized at that point that the
journey into the Divine or the journey
into the universe was infinite
there's no end to it
because like many people I had thought
that you did this work you took the
journey in order to get to the end in
order to get home in order to get to
back to Source become one with God or to
dissolve into the Primal void
but I had become one with the Divine and
I had learned that there are many levels
of Oneness and I had dissolved into the
void but I learned that there are many
levels of of the Void to dissolve into
but this experience showed me that even
using this extraordinarily powerful
method
I would never ever be able to explore
the universe in its totality it's just
so big so vast with so many layers to it
such wonderful expanse
and this was this represented a
fundamental pivot first it just shook me
to the core to realize the true expanse
of what I was involved in
and then it relaxed me into
uh into a just a deep sense of
existential relaxation
and this is why if I were doing this
work over again I would be gentler with
myself because I've learned that the
goal is not to try to get to some
destination not to get to some place
because no matter how hard I pushed new
doors kept opening and new doors kept
opening now I understand that a better
way to think about this work
is that we open ourselves and we make
ourselves porous to the totality of life
and we let in as much of this knowledge
and as much of the energy and as much of
the compassion as it's possible we let
it in and we try to hold it and bring it
into our being and enter and become more
porous to it and open to it
so it's it's not a process of kind of
going out and exploring it's really a
process of intaking bringing it in and
and bringing it into the very roots of
our being let it change not only our
mind and our convictions but letting it
change our biology literally it reaches
into and changes I think as a very
subtle physiological levels that we're
maybe just beginning to appreciate and
and haven't begun to map yet
and once you understand that it's not
about trying to get to the end of this
road
but it's really about becoming more
conscious and more skillful as we stand
between two realities
one reality in time space and the realer
reality outside of time and space the
nerd in the mother universe and the
daughter Universe we are in the daughter
universe
we are always surrounded and Infused by
the mother universe
and if we can stand a stride Both Worlds
and integrate the constant inflow
of the life from the mother Universe in
increasing measure inside the daughter
universe
then that kind of
that brings a
an instantiated Joy an incarnate Joy a a
sense of richer and richer presence
inside time and space sweet allow time
and space to become increasingly
transparent to that which created time
and space
so I would encourage a gentler a gentler
psychedelic process a gentle in entry
into the great expanse and I would be
I'm more patient now with how long
spiritual unfold thing takes than maybe
I was when I was a young man
[Music]